Let's dive into how CrateDB
handles time series.
We will show and explain how
CrateDB helps to query data in
milliseconds, leverage the
simplicity of SQL, combine
multiple data types, handle high
ingest rates and store years of
historical data.
Weather data will be frequently
used in our examples as it is
easy to comprehend and available
from public sources.
As necessary,
we will incorporate other data
sets to best exhibit the
extensive capabilities of CrateDB in managing and analyzing
time series data.
For most of the examples, we use
rather small data sets for
demonstration purposes.
In later sessions we will also
cover how to work with larger
than memory data sets.
In this video, we will create a
data table and populate it with
weather readings from locations
across the globe.
Each record includes the exact
time of the recording, the
location of the weather station,
the temperature in degrees
Celsius, the relative humidity,
and the wind speed in kilometers
per hour.
We will then showcase the power
of CrateDB's querying
capabilities, from basic data
extraction to more complex real
time aggregations.
This will highlight the
versatility and usability of
CrateDB in managing, analyzing
and extracting insights from
time series data.
First, let's create the table to
store the weather data.
Create a table with columns
tailored to the data set using
the CREATE TABLE command.
Although we are using only a few
variables here, CrateDB can
easily accommodate hundreds of
columns in a single table.
With the table ready, you are
now set to insert the data set.
As the data is available in a
publicly readable location, you
can easily insert it using the
COPY FROM SQL statement.
As you can see, the data set
only contains 70,000 records.
For educational purposes, real
world data sets are usually much
larger and we will demonstrate
those in later sessions.
Now that the data is
successfully imported, let us
start to explore it.
We start with a basic SELECT
statement on all columns and
limit the output to display the
first 10 records only.
You see the first values with
all previously created
measurements.
CrateDB is built for fast
aggregations using columnar
storage to speed up aggregations
across large data sets and long
periods of time.
For example, we want to
calculate the average
temperature for each location by
using the average aggregation
function.
Computing basic averages is not
special, but what if you need to
answer more detailed questions?
For example, if you want to know
the highest temperature for each
place and when it occurred.
Simple groupings might not be
enough and CrateDB has enhanced
tools for time series data.
You can use the max_by function
which gives you a value like the
time when another value like the
temperature is at its highest.
Let's look at the example query.
We now see when the peak in
temperature occurred for every
location together with the
respective maximum temperature.
You have probably observed by
now that there are gaps in the
data set for certain metrics.
Such occurrences are common,
perhaps due to a sensor
malfunction or disconnection.
To address this, the missing
values need to be filled in.
While there are many ways how to
deal with missing values, we
want to interpolate based on the
previous and the following
non-empty value.
You can use another statement of
CrateDB's SQL window functions
paired with the ignore nulls
feature within a common table
expression.
We utilize window functions to
spot the next and prior non null
temperature recordings and then
compute the arithmetic mean to
bridge the gap.
This query retrieves the missing
temperature values and
interpolates them by averaging
the previous and next available
temperature readings.
Let us summarize how CrateDB
differentiates for time series
data.
It is a SQL database designed
for large amounts of data.
It offers built in time series
functionality including window
functions and aggregation
functions which simplify
querying and analysis.
Functions such as lead, lag and
date bin as well as joins allow
for advanced data handling and
will be discussed in detail in
the following sessions.
Beyond time series data, CrateDB
supports various data types
including structured,
unstructured, JSON, geospatial,
BLOB and vector data.
Its columnar storage format is
efficient for time series data,
enabling complex ad hoc
aggregations within milliseconds
across millions and billions of
records.
The robust time based
partitioning and charting
enables high cardinality without
the need for data
preaggregation or downsampling.
CrateDB's distributed
architecture enables high
availability and horizontal
scaling across multiple nodes,
ideal for handling large volumes
of data from diverse sources.
It also supports data tiering,
allowing for cost efficient long
term data storage, integration
with popular data visualization
tools and compatibility with
Java and Python ecosystems
facilitate efficient data
analysis and visualization.
As an open source solution,
CrateDB offers cost effective
licensing and an active
community for support.